docs: add proposal for web basic-auth support (#8577)
prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator: Documentation/proposals/202605-web-basic-auth.md

  * [exporter-toolkit web/handler.go](https://github.com/prometheus/exporter-toolkit/blob/master/web/handler.go) — implements `basic_auth_users` + auth cache

> TL;DR: Expose Prometheus's existing `basic_auth_users` web-config setting through the `Prometheus`, `Alertmanager` and `ThanosRuler` CRDs by adding a `basicAuthUsers []BasicAuth` field to the existing `WebConfigFileFields` struct. Handle the downstream effects on liveness/readiness probes, prometheus-config-reloader, and the Thanos sidecar by minting an operator-managed internal user that all in-pod callers use.

## Why

Prometheus, Alertmanager and ThanosRuler all support HTTP basic authentication on their web servers via the `--web.config.file` flag. The operator already builds a web-config Secret for TLS settings but does not emit a `basic_auth_users:` section, so users who want to protect the web UI/API of these workloads have no operator-managed path.

Today's workarounds are unsatisfying:

* Mutual TLS — heavyweight, requires per-client cert management.
* Ingress-level auth (typically ingress-nginx) — the most common workaround in the field, but it has two structural problems detailed below.

> * `spec.secrets` + `additionalArgs: --web.config.file=…` — rejected by the operator because `web.config.file` is a managed argument.

Reviewer: not really a workaround since it can't be applied.

Author: Good catch — removed from the workarounds list. The spec.secrets + additionalArgs combination now appears in the Pitfalls section as context for why users try it and are surprised, with the Migration/compatibility section reaffirming that the rejection continues unchanged.

> 

Reviewer: The most common implementation is probably to run a HTTP reverse proxy sidecar with `.spec.listenLocal: true`.

Author: Added a bullet for the reverse-proxy sidecar approach with a reference to Hades32's report in #4652. I've avoided making popularity claims about any of the workarounds since we don't have data on which is most common — just listed them with their trade-offs.

### Ingress-level auth is no longer a defensible answer

The most popular existing workaround — and the one frequently recommended in [#4200](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/4200)'s discussion — is to put ingress-nginx in front of Prometheus and configure basic auth at the ingress layer. As of 2026 this position is significantly weaker than it was when the issue was filed in 2021, for two independent reasons.

> **1. It only protects the perimeter, not the workload.** The Prometheus Pod itself remains unauthenticated. Anything with network reach to the ClusterIP — another workload, a compromised sidecar, a pod running with `hostNetwork`, a lateral attacker who has obtained any in-cluster credential — can read every metric, query the API, and (for Alertmanager) silence or fire alerts at will. The ingress is a thin shell around an open service. Native basic auth on the workload provides defense-in-depth: even an attacker who has bypassed the perimeter must still authenticate to reach the data plane.

Reviewer: (nit) network policies could be used to restrict network access but multiple layers of defense are always best.

Author: Reworked the surrounding paragraph in this thread. I dropped the "most popular existing workaround" framing — we don't have data to support that — and generalized the discussion to "proxy-based workarounds" as a class, since the structural limitation (Prometheus itself unauthenticated) is the same whether the proxy is an ingress or a sidecar. Also added a paragraph acknowledging that basic auth is not a complete security solution and encouraging layered defenses (NetworkPolicies, TLS, etc.).

> **2. ingress-nginx is being retired.** SIG Network and the Kubernetes Security Response Committee [announced the retirement of Ingress NGINX on 2025-11-11](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2025/11/11/ingress-nginx-retirement/), with the project to be retired in **March 2026**. From the announcement:

Reviewer: I would remove this part since it's very specific to ingress-nginx and doesn't bring value to the proposal.

Author: Trimmed substantially — kept a single soft sentence with one citation, removed all the inline quotes and the second statement reference. It now sits inside the broader "proxy-based workarounds" paragraph rather than as its own subsection. Let me know if even this brief mention is too much; happy to remove entirely.

	// Plaintext passwords are not accepted; the operator will not hash them.
	//
	// Username and password references may point at different keys in the
	// same Secret. Usernames must be unique across entries.
	// +optional
	BasicAuthUsers []BasicAuth `json:"basicAuthUsers,omitempty"`
}
```

`BasicAuth` already exists and uses `SecretKeySelector` for both fields, which keeps every credential out of the CR object itself. This satisfies both delivery paths users have asked for:

* Helm-values path (e.g. kube-prometheus-stack): the chart renders a `Secret` from `values.yaml` and the CR references it.
* External secret path (e.g. External Secrets Operator): the user/system creates the `Secret` directly and the CR references it.

The operator does not need to know which path produced the Secret.

### Generated web-config

`pkg/webconfig/config.go` already emits `tls_server_config:` and `http_server_config:` to the mounted web-config Secret. We extend the generator to also emit:

```yaml
basic_auth_users:
  <username>: <bcrypt-hash>
  <username2>: <bcrypt-hash2>
```

Duplicate usernames are rejected at config-generation time (Prometheus accepts the YAML map but silently overrides).

> ### Operator-managed internal user

Reviewer: if possible, I'd prefer if the operator stays out of the business of provisioning that username/password.
One alternative would be that alongside the list of usernames/passwords, the resource's owner provides the "internal" username.

Author: Adopted "resource owner provides the internal user" with a small extension. New `web.internalUser` field references a Secret with three keys: `username`, `password` (plaintext, required for in-pod callers), and `passwordBcrypt` (optional).

When `passwordBcrypt` is absent, the operator bcrypts the plaintext at reconcile and caches the result keyed on a hash of the plaintext — re-bcrypts only on rotation, no per-reconcile churn or Secret-write churn. Cache lives in operator process memory; first reconcile after operator restart re-bcrypts once per workload, then steady state.

When `passwordBcrypt` is present, the operator verifies it matches the plaintext via `bcrypt.CompareHashAndPassword` (cached on first success). On match, writes the user-supplied bcrypt verbatim and performs no further operations. On mismatch, emits a Warning event, logs, and falls back to bcrypting the plaintext — the system continues functioning rather than failing reconcile.

This collapses the operator-managed-Secret, rotation, collision, and operator-side-bcrypt concerns into a single coherent design while keeping the "operator stays out of provisioning" property you asked for.

When `basicAuthUsers` is non-empty, the operator reconciles one additional Secret per workload CR. The name is a stable, documented contract:

```
<PrefixedName>-web-auth
```

`<PrefixedName>` is the existing operator convention (`prometheus-<name>` for `Prometheus`, `alertmanager-<name>` for `Alertmanager`, `thanos-ruler-<name>` for `ThanosRuler`). The name is committed-to as part of this proposal so downstream consumers (kube-prometheus, kube-prometheus-stack) can rely on it.

The Secret contains three keys:

> * `username` — a fixed value (e.g. `prometheus-operator`), so the in-pod callers can read a single key without coordination

Reviewer: Do we even need to put the username in the secret? What happens if there's a duplicate in the user-provided user list?

Author: Both concerns resolved by the new design (see thread on line 119). The internal user's username is now resource-owner-supplied via the same Secret-key pattern used for the external entries; nothing is operator-generated. Duplicate username between `internalUser` and any `basicAuthUsers` entry is rejected at reconcile time with a clear error event.

* `password` — a generated random plaintext, used by in-pod callers (probes, reloader, sidecar)
* `password-bcrypt` — the bcrypt of `password`, used in the rendered web-config

> The Secret is owned by the workload CR (ownerReference) so it GCs on deletion. Its bcrypt-form is appended to the rendered `basic_auth_users:` map alongside the user-supplied entries. The password is regenerated only when the Secret is missing, not on every reconcile.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
The Secret is owned by the workload CR (ownerReference) so it is garbage-collected on deletion. Its bcrypt-form is appended to the rendered `basic_auth_users:` map alongside the user-supplied entries. The password is regenerated only when the Secret is missing, not on every reconcile.
```

Author: This whole paragraph is being removed as part of the redesign in the thread on line 119 — no operator-generated Secret in the new design, so there's no ownerReference/regeneration text to clean up. Thanks for the wording suggestion anyway; I'll keep "garbage-collected" in mind for any future ownerReference text.

> The Secret is owned by the workload CR (ownerReference) so it GCs on deletion. Its bcrypt-form is appended to the rendered `basic_auth_users:` map alongside the user-supplied entries. The password is regenerated only when the Secret is missing, not on every reconcile.

Reviewer: > The password is regenerated only when the Secret is missing, not on every reconcile.

What happens if the password is rotated? Is the value properly propagated to every caller?

Author: Good question — under the new design, rotation is user-initiated and propagates as follows:

1. User updates the plaintext in their Secret (typically via ESO or `kubectl`).
2. Operator detects the change on the next reconcile, re-bcrypts the new plaintext, regenerates the web-config Secret.
3. Prometheus's exporter-toolkit watches the web-config file and picks up the new bcrypt automatically.
4. In-pod callers (probes, config-reloader, Thanos sidecar) read the plaintext from a volume-mounted Secret. Kubelet refreshes mounted Secret contents on its sync interval, and the callers read on each use, so they pick up the new plaintext without a pod restart.

The decision to use volume mounts (not env-from-secret) for the in-pod callers is specifically driven by this rotation case — env vars are set at pod creation and don't refresh, which would require a rolling restart on every rotation. The revised proposal spells this out.

* If `basicAuthUsers` is set **and** the user has supplied a probe override via strategic merge patch → the user's override wins, per the existing merge-patch semantics. The operator's exec probe is replaced. Users opting out this way are responsible for handling auth themselves (e.g. by sticking with `tcpSocket`).
* The note in `strategic-merge-patch.md` about exec-probes being needed "when prioritizing credential security over granular readiness checks" is no longer the only path — users who do nothing get a granular readiness check *and* credential security. The doc will be updated in PR #3 (not invalidated; cross-referenced).

### prometheus-config-reloader

The reloader binary today has no outbound basic-auth support, so it cannot reach `/-/reload` or `/api/v1/status/runtimeinfo` once auth is on. We add two flags:

```
--reload-basic-auth-username=<value>
--reload-basic-auth-password-file=<path>
```

> Both are read from a Secret-mounted env var or file so the password never lands in argv. When the operator detects basic auth on the workload, it adds the flags and a `secretKeyRef`-sourced env var to the reloader container, pointing at the operator-managed Secret.

Reviewer: not clear if we use a file for the password or env var?

Author: File only. The ambiguity in the proposal was a leftover from an earlier draft — choosing file (volume-mounted Secret) gives us auto-refresh on rotation (kubelet syncs mounted Secret contents) without a pod restart, and the password never lands in `/proc/PID/environ`. The username is non-sensitive and stays as a plain flag value. Updated flag set:

```text
--reload-basic-auth-username=<value>
--reload-basic-auth-password-file=<path>
```

This change also closes [#5836](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/5836) for users running the reloader against a separately-protected Prometheus.

### Thanos sidecar

The sidecar communicates with Prometheus via the YAML file referenced by `--prometheus.http-client-file`, which is built by `pkg/prometheus/server/thanos_sidecar_config.go`. We extend that builder to emit:

```yaml
basic_auth:
  username: <operator-managed>
  password_file: /etc/thanos/auth/password
```

> …and mount the operator-managed Secret at that path. The thanos-sidecar http-client format already supports this natively.

Reviewer: there's a Thanos version check to be implemented.

Author: Added a Thanos version-gate paragraph in the Thanos sidecar section:

> The `--prometheus.http-client-file` flag requires Thanos ≥ 0.24.0 (already tracked by the operator as `thanosSupportedVersionHTTPClientFlag`). When `internalUser` is set and the configured Thanos image is older, the operator must fail reconcile with a clear error rather than silently produce a broken sidecar. The same applies if the user later downgrades the Thanos image while basic auth is enabled.

* `Documentation/platform/strategic-merge-patch.md` will get a cross-reference noting that `spec.web.basicAuthUsers` now provides an operator-managed path that obsoletes the documented workaround for most users.
* `Documentation/platform/thanos.md`, `Documentation/platform/troubleshooting.md`, `Documentation/platform/exposing-prometheus-and-alertmanager.md` — short additions referencing the new field where relevant.
* `Documentation/api-reference/api.md` — autogenerated by `make generate`.

### Open questions

1. **Opt-out of the operator-managed user.** Should users be able to disable it, e.g. when they want to manage probes/reloader auth themselves via exporter-toolkit path exclusion once that lands? Recommendation: no opt-out in v1; revisit if exporter-toolkit#151 merges.

> 2. **Validation surface.** Recent CRD work (v0.91.0, [#8480](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/pull/8480)) has moved toward CEL/admission-time enforcement of structural rules (e.g. mutual exclusion in `ScrapeConfig`). Should obviously-malformed bcrypt values fail admission (CEL on the Secret value at resolve time) rather than emitting a runtime warning event? Recommendation: runtime warning event for v1 (the Secret value is not visible to admission), but open to maintainer preference.

Reviewer: I don't see how we could use CEL since the value isn't in the custom resource but only referenced by secret's key.

Author: Agreed — dropped the CEL framing for content-based checks. The validation section now scopes CEL to admission-time structural rules only (`basicAuthUsers` requires `internalUser`); all content-based checks (bcrypt format heuristics on both fields, plaintext/bcrypt mismatch detection, username collision) are reconcile-time Warning events, since CEL can't see Secret values. The corresponding open question is dropped.

> 3. **Status condition / metric for "basic auth active".** Cheap to add; useful for users debugging "why is my scrape 401'ing". Defer to maintainer preference.

Reviewer: not sure what is implied here

Author: Dropped. The original intent was a way for cluster operators to confirm basic auth is active on a given CR (a metric like `prometheus_operator_web_basic_auth_enabled` was one shape I considered), but the same information is readable from the rendered web-config Secret, so it isn't actually load-bearing. If a clear use case surfaces after the feature ships we can add a status condition or metric in a follow-up.

## Alternatives

1. **Wait for [exporter-toolkit#151](https://github.com/prometheus/exporter-toolkit/pull/151).** Path exclusion for `/-/healthy`, `/-/ready` would eliminate the probe problem and shrink this proposal substantially. The PR has been open since 2024 and is currently in conflict; we cannot block on it. If/when it merges we can simplify probes in a follow-up; the operator-managed user is still needed for the reloader and sidecar.

2. **Mutual TLS only.** Already supported via `WebTLSConfig`. Heavyweight for the common "I just want a password on the UI" use case. Not a replacement for basic auth.

3. **Ingress-level auth.** Only protects perimeter traffic, leaving the in-cluster ClusterIP unauthenticated; and the most-used implementation (ingress-nginx) is being retired in March 2026 with no further security patches. See "Ingress-level auth is no longer a defensible answer" above.

4. **Operator-side bcrypt of plaintext.** Lets users supply plaintext in a Secret and have the operator hash it. Rejected because:
   * Every reconcile would produce a fresh salt, causing a rolling restart on each reconcile, OR

>    * The operator would have to persist its own derived Secret and track whether the source changed — significantly more state machinery for marginal UX gain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * The operator would have to persist its own derived Secret and track whether the source changed — significantly more state machinery for marginal UX gain.
   * It exposes the operator to potential security issues which maintainers don't want to deal with.
```

Author: Taken. Note that the new design (see thread on line 119) does re-introduce operator-side bcrypt for the single internal user, but the security/state-machinery objections still apply to the *general* case being rejected here (operator hashes every user's plaintext). I've clarified the scope of the rejection in the surrounding text and added a note pointing at the internal-user discussion so the contradiction isn't surprising.
